The Project Gutenberg eBook of Artemas--the second book, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Artemas--the second book

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: October 12, 2022 [eBook #69144]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARTEMAS--THE SECOND
BOOK ***







[Illustration: Cover art]



  ARTEMAS

  THE SECOND BOOK


  _Concerning men, and the things
  that men did do, at the time when
  there was war_



  NEW YORK
  GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




  COPYRIGHT, 1918,
  BY GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




  UNTO
  EVE




THE SECOND BOOK OF ARTEMAS



CHAPTER I.

1 _Artemas writeth again_.  3 _Concerning a journey_.  7 _And the
things that he did learn_.  13 _One confesseth a secret_.  17 _And
imparteth it_.  20 _His mendacity condemneth him_.  22 _The scribe
revealeth himself_.


The words of Artemas of the scribes that _were_ in Lon in the land of
En, being those _words_ that he did write him _also_;

2 Of the things that were and of the things that were to be:
concerning men and the things that men did do.

3 ¶ Now it came to pass on an occasion that I, _being_ Artemas, the
scribe, did journey in a certain carriage unto the city of Lon.

4 And it was a carriage that was full _of a_ multitude, such being
the wont in those days, so that _I did_ perforce stand me up on my
feet.

5 And, behold, _there was_ a man; and he did sit upon my right hand.
And _there was_ another man also; and he did sit upon my left hand.

6 And they did hold speech, the one with the other.  Yea, _even_ as I
stood up between them did they speak familiarly across me.

7 ¶ Wherefore I did learn many _things_ concerning them, and
concerning the course of the war, and concerning the rulers of the
land,

8 And concerning the wives of the rulers and their children also, and
concerning the money that _they were_ possessed of, and concerning
their wickedness in secret _places_.

9 And after I had heard many _things_ that amazed me mightily, then
he _that was_ upon my left hand, he did speak unto the other,

10 And he did say unto him, What thinkest thou concerning the Book
_that is_ of Artemas?

11 And he that was upon my right hand, he did wriggle him about in
strange ways.

12 And _after that_ he was wriggled about sufficiently, then did he
make answer and he did say,

13 ¶ Speak not unto me concerning that Book, for _I have_ a reason.
Also, it is a secret.

14 And I did ope mine ears full wide for to hear, notwithstanding
that he was that manner _of man_ that expoundeth nought save _only_
the things that be secret.

15 And he did say unto his friend, Nevertheless, _because_ thou hast
an open countenance and art, moreover, that man whom my soul loveth,

16 Therefore dost thou prevail upon me to impart unto thee _that
which_ thou shalt tell unto no man.

17 ¶ For I, even I, am he that did write the Book _that is_ of
Artemas.

18 Yea, notwithstanding that thou knowest me only as one that vendeth
choice meats, nevertheless I did write me also that Book which is
inscribed unto Eve.

19 And perchance I shall write me another book _also_ if, so be it, I
am spared _and_ it pleaseth me so to do.

20 ¶ And after I had heard the things that he did say, then did I
know him _for_ a liar.

21 For he was a man that was garbed in the raiment of peace, but he
that men call Artemas, is he _not one_ of the host of En?

22 ¶ Verily, _it is_ even so, or otherwise.  But which _of him_ be
him, what man shall say anything to the contrary?




CHAPTER II.

2 _Concerning David_.  9 _Concerning Simon_.  12 _Concerning
Horatio_.  17 _Concerning Frances_.  22 _Concerning Lazz_.  24
_Concerning Reding_.  27 _Concerning Lanz_.


Now these be the names and these _the manner_ of men; and as it is
writ about them, so _also_ is it.

2 ¶ There was David, that was the chief ruler over all the land.  And
he continued in the way that _he was_ going, gaining favour with the
people continually, and filling the minds of them that hated him with
bitter envy.

3 Verily, he became _more so_ than ever before, and whatsoever there
was to be done, that thing of a surety he would do.  Neither was
there any occasion _when_ he was found wanting.

4 Wherefore it came to pass that those who ruled _with_ him, after
that they had got them _into_ an hole, then they did come unto David
for to raise them up again; and always he _did do_ it.

5 And when the hearts of the men of En grew heavy within them
_because_ of the soreness of their lot, which was an hard lot,
_being_ full of trials,

6 Then would he open his mouth full wide and _he would_ speak.  And
the words that he did utter, they poured forth in a fiery stream that
did set the hearts of the people aflame.

7 Wherefore his enemies, they did gnash their teeth in secret, being
consumed _with_ the violence of their rage.  And they did conspire
_together_ for to do him hurt; yea, his greatness, it did fret them
_beyond_ endurance.

8 Nevertheless, there was none other amongst them that did _come up_
unto David, that ruled _at a time_ of trouble such as never before
was known in all the world.

9 ¶ Now Simon was that man who _had_ erstwhile _been_ a thorn in the
flesh of the rulers because he did abominate the war, nor comprehend
that it _was_ requisite.  Wherefore there were many that did call him
Simple.

10 But after that he had perceived _things_, and the men of Hu, he
had seen that _which_ was in their minds, then did he gird on his
armour and he did go out for to fight.  For the lust of blood, it was
entered into his bones.

11 _Moreover_, he did take a damsel unto him to wife.

12 ¶ Now Horatio, _being_ the scribe of the new apocrypha, he
refrained not from writing concerning Horatio, and concerning the
things that Horatio, he would do.

13 And on an occasion he spake unto the people in a loud voice,
saying unto them, Hearken unto my voice, ye men of En, and pay heed
to _the words_ of my mouth.  For who shall be keeper of the victuals?
And who the chief larderer of En?

14 Verily, there is _such_ a man that be fit for to undertake it.
And the name of the man, behold, _it is_ Horatio!

15 And when the people had heard the things that he did say, they
began to observe him closely.  And they perceived that though he was
given _over_ to fatness, yet had he also an hungry eye.

16 Wherefore they made him not the chief larderer of En, _neither_
did they choose him for to be the keeper of the victuals; for they
were a crafty lot, and the size of his stomach, _it was_ against him.

17 ¶ Now Frances, that was surnamed Loid, _he was_ the chief of all
the soldiers that were in Lon.

18 And he was for ever making him ordinances so that the fighters
that were in Lon, they should know the _things_ that they should do.

19 And on a time he did stand forth in the presence of the people,
and he cried out in a loud voice, saying unto them, Why speak ye
_concerning_ my soldiers, that they be boys?

20 Know ye not that they be men, full grown and vigorous.  Also, they
do acquit themselves valiantly in the face of the enemy, so that all
the world, it is amazed at their prowess.  And he upbraided them
soundly _because_ of it.

21 Wherefore many condemned him for a fool, because he understood not
that which was in the people's hearts nor perceived the meaning of
_the word_.

22 ¶ And there was a certain man, and his name, it was Lazz.  And he
was one of them that was born _of_ the enemy.

23 And because he did have friends in an high place, therefore,
whatsoever he did do, that _thing_, it was judged in secret.
Nevertheless, the judges, _they did_ put him away.

24 ¶ Now, he that was the chief judge in the land of En, his name, it
was Reding.

25 And he was one of the children of Israel, a man of honour, and of
good repute _throughout_ all the land.  Also, he was a man that did
follow after wisdom, having a full head and abhorring _the ways_ of
the foolish.

26 Nevertheless, the rulers did send him to uphold the dignity of En
amongst the men of Amer; whereat many wondered, _because_ he was a
most fit man.

27 ¶ And there was a certain man, being _of the_ nobles of the land,
and his name it was Lanz.

28 And on an occasion he did hold forth _concerning_ peace and
concerning the blessings thereof.  Wherefore there were some that
said, Behold, _he is_ possessed of a bolo.

29 And although he perceived that men, they understood him not,
nevertheless he did hold forth again; and his folly was a bye-word in
the land.




CHAPTER III.

1 _Concerning Ronda_.  6 _Concerning Yapp_.  7 _Concerning Smuts_.  9
_Concerning Barnz_.  16 _Concerning Rep_.


Now he that was chosen for to keep the food of the people, and to be
the chief larderer in the land, his name, it was Ronda.

2 And the path of this man, it was beset with obstacles; and it did
lie between the devil, _that was_ the sellers of victuals, and the
deep sea, _that was_ the people.

3 And he did have dominion over the birds _of the_ air, and over the
beasts _of the_ field, and over the fishes that were in the sea.

4 And at a _word_ from his mouth, all the rabbits that were in the
land, they did vanish out of sight; neither were they seen any _more_
of man.

5 Nevertheless, though some did curse him openly, yet did he do that
_which_ was appointed unto him.

6 ¶ Now he that was an help unto Ronda, his name, it was Yapp.  And
he was a man that did buy him pig in small _pieces_; neither did he
get him the half of a swine, save only _over_ a long time and in
fragments.

7 ¶ Now there was a certain great captain, and his name, it was
Smuts.  And he did come _from_ afar off for to counsel the fighters
of En.

8 And notwithstanding that his name, it was _what_ it was,
nevertheless he was a power in the land; and his words, they were
sold for _the price_ of four farthings.

9 ¶ Now, there was another man, _also_, and his name, it was Barnz.
And notwithstanding that _he was_ a man of labour, nevertheless, his
seat was amongst the rulers of the land.

10 And he spake unto the people _in_ a speech, and he said unto them,
Who is Winston and who _is_ he?  Verily, he is _that_ man who hath
butted him in, and he hath wrought mischief throughout all the land,
because of _what_ he hath done.

11 And after he had finished speaking, behold, a clamour arose
amongst all the people, and they cried out against Winston, _because_
he had butted him in.

12 And when Barnz saw how _it was_ with the people, and that Winston,
also, he was swollen up with the anger _that was_ in him, then did he
speak unto the people again, fearing _lest_ they had not heard him
aright.

13 And he spake unto them in these words, saying, What I _did_ mean
or what I did ought to have meant, it _was_ another thing.

14 Wherefore, understand ye all that Winston, he did not butt _him_
in alone.  For I, even I, that be Barnz, the man of labour, I also
did butt me in _with_ him.  Also, _and_ moreover, we did butt us in
together.

15 And at that time, there was no butter, save _only_ these, in all
the land of En.

16 ¶ Now there was a certain man, and his name, it was Rep: and his
pen, it was mightier _than_ his sword.

17 And he did remove himself from the camp of the Amalekites and did
pitch his tent _amongst_ the children of Moab.

18 And when he was arrived in the land of Moab, he straightway sat
_himself_ down on a seat, and he did spread him _out_ for to write.

19 Yea, he did write even such things _and_ such things; and things
also in likewise, these _did_ he write him as well.

20 And he did rend the Amalekites _with_ words, and the rulers of the
land did he chastise most hotly; with the quill of a goose did he
smite them, nor spared he any one _of them_ at all.

21 Wherefore all _those_ that heeded him, they did tear their clothes
in the violence of their perturbation.  And they did put on sackcloth
and ashes, and their faces they did smear _with_ mud, crying out in a
loud voice, _and_ saying,

22 Now is the end of all things, and _now_ the end of En.  Verily, we
are thrown in the dust at the feet of our enemies, for the rulers are
turned _against_ us.

23 And they do conspire with the Amalekites for to bring about our
undoing.  Yea, the end of all things, it is _close_ at hand.

24 And because they were amongst the false prophets, therefore was
_it_ not so.  And, notwithstanding that Rep, he did write him _thus_
darkly, nevertheless the people, they did get them _on_ with the war.

25 But Rep, because he did write _concerning_ secret matters, he paid
for his temerity in an hundred pieces of gold, all good money _and_
very precious.




CHAPTER IV

1 _Willi vexeth the men of Amer_.  6 _Wudro warneth Willi_.  10 _Who
taketh counsel of his chief captains_.  17 _And continueth in his
evil ways_.  21 _The men of Amer make them war_.  23 _Willi derideth
them publicly_.  28 _Wudro getteth him on with it_.  36 _And the
voice of peace is heard over the waters_.


Now there was great vexation of spirit amongst _the men_ of Amer, for
the servants of Willi, the king of Hu, they conspired together and
they did sink the ships of Amer _in_ the sea.

2 And whensoever a man of Amer did perish _because_ of it, then did
Willi write him an epistle concerning the matter.

3 And the grief that was writ _upon_ the paper, behold, it was very
beautiful; but the manner of atonement, _it was_ only in talents of
gold.

4 And he did seal the epistle _with_ a seal; and, lo! it was made _in
the shape of_ a tear.

5 Now the longest rope, _it hath_ an end.  Wherefore it came to pass
_in time_ that Wudro, the son of Wyl, being he that did rule in Amer,
he sent messengers unto Willi, saying unto him,

6 ¶ Such things and such things hast thou done, all these _being_
against thy plighted word; and thine iniquity, it hath tormented me
for a long _time_ past.

7 Now, therefore, hearken unto me, and _pay_ attention to my words.

8 Because I am a man of peace, therefore have I borne with thee long
_enough_; and I am become sick unto death _with_ thy naughtiness.
And the blood of my murdered people, it crieth _aloud_ for
retribution.

9 Take heed, _therefore_, and mend the evil of thy ways, for, _on
the_ next occasion, assuredly shalt thou rue the day.

10 ¶ And when Willi had heard the things that Wudro, the son of Wyl,
did say unto him, he sent in haste unto his chief captains, and he
did commune _with them_.

11 And he questioned them closely concerning the words of Wudro.  And
he said unto them, Think ye that this man, he meaneth _anything_?

12 And they made answer unto him, saying, Be of good cheer, and heed
him not, for he is a man that acteth only _according to_ his
advantage.

13 And the land of Amer, it prospereth exceedingly; neither doth the
miller turn away _the_ stream which worketh his wheel.

14 Also, he liveth afar off, and his servants, _they are_ unready.
Verily, the threats of such an one, they be full of emptiness; and
whatsoever he sayeth, that hath he _also_ said before.

15 Nevertheless, when the time cometh, then will we smite him
_because_ of it.

16 And after they were finished speaking, the heart of Willi was
rejoiced and his soul was filled with courage.

17 ¶ And he spake unto them in these words, _saying_, Assuredly are
ye men after mine own understanding.  Let us, therefore, see about
it.  And they did see about it.

18 And when word was brought unto Wudro concerning _it_, and how
Willi made mock of his threats, _then_ waxed he very wroth.

19 And he cried out in the violence of his anger, saying, Am I, then,
Job, _that be_ born again, to be tormented thus?

20 And he straightway called the people together, and he told them
_all_ the things that Willi had done.

21 ¶ And he said unto them, Is it, therefore, _a matter_ for war?
And they answered him with a mighty shout, saying, It is _a matter_
for war.

22 And when Willi heard what was come to pass, _he was_ amazed, and
his knees, they did tremble beneath him.

23 ¶ Nevertheless, he commanded his servants that they should bring
unto him the brazen mask, _being_ part of the royal attire.

24 And when it was brought unto him, he did hide the light of his
countenance _behind_ it.  And he raised his _voice_ on high, and he
spake, saying,

25 What of the land of Amer?  And what _of it_?  Verily, a pin that
lieth in the _way_, it is of more account than a spike that lifteth
its head at a distance.

26 Even so, the iron heel of Hu, it levelleth all things; neither
shall any _man_ presume to withstand it.

27 And after he was finished speaking, he sent out messengers _unto_
the four corners of the earth, instructing them that they should tell
_these things_ unto all peoples.

28 ¶ Now Wudro, the son of Wyl, _after_ that he had made him war, he
cried not out from the housetops concerning the things he would do,
but he gat him _about_ for to do them.

29 And he opened wide the strings of his purse, so that the shekels,
they gushed _forth_ as the waters of a brook after rain.  Neither
_was he_ backward in the matter of food, making due provision in all
things.

30 And he sent much munition of war unto them that were _with him_,
and he commanded his physicians that they should go out for to
succour the wounded.

31 And he did send his vessels of war also, _which_ were useful
things and ready for the fray.  And of men that did fly in the air,
he did send _of these_ a goodly band, and valiant.

32 And he built him a mighty army, all picked _men_ of the best in
the land; and he sent them unto the land of Eur for to fight against
the men of Hu.

33 And he rested him not, neither by day nor by night _did he_ rest
him, but he was for ever at it, doing all those things that were
requisite and necessary _unto_ the undertaking.

34 And when word was brought unto Willi that Wudro, he had taken the
coat from off _his_ back, and that he laboured without respite, then
grew he sore afraid.

35 And he _called_ his counsellors unto him, and he spake unto them
in these words, saying, Is there no one _now_ amongst all the men of
peace _that will_ raise his voice against this bloody war?

36 ¶ And, lo! straightway, _there was_ a voice, and it spake
concerning peace.  And it was blown along by the wind, even unto the
land of Amer _was it_ blown.

37 And when it was come unto the ears of Wudro, that was the son of
Wyl, he made answer unto it, and he did say, Verily, _it hath_ a
goodly sound.

38 Nevertheless, _this peace_, it shall not come to pass; for the
King of Hu, he hath a lying tongue, and his plighted word, _hath_ he
not broken it before?

39 And because he is _what_ he is, therefore shall the compact of
peace be made only with that man which _he is_ not.

40 And the words of Wudro, they were blown along by the wind, even
back from the land of Amer _were they_ blown on the wings of the wind.




CHAPTER V.

1 _Concerning the land of Russ_.  4 _The dividing up of it_.  6
_Confusion ariseth_.  10 _All men are equal_.  11 _Concerning Tino,
the King of the Greeks_.  16 _Jon smiteth him_.  10 _He getteth him
thence_.  22 _Willi speaketh unto the nations_.  24 _His lamentation
in secret_.


Now it came to pass in the land of Russ that all the people cried out
against the king _because_ of his tyranny.

2 And they did come upon him suddenly, and they did _take_ him.  And
they cast him into prison, so that he no longer ruled _over_ them.

3 And they straightway set _about_ it for to make all men equal
throughout the land.  Yea, rich _and_ poor, the wise man _and_ the
fool, the workers _and_ the sluggards, the good men _and_ the evil.
All these did they strive to make equal together.

4 ¶ And they did divide the land into pieces, being a piece _unto_
each one of them.  And the money that was in the treasury, that also
did they share _amongst_ them.

5 Nevertheless, there were some, being the nimble _ones_, that did
profit by it exceedingly.  And every man's hand, it was turned
against his neighbour, for they feared very dreadfully lest _he had_
too much.

6 ¶ And a legion of devils broke loose _amongst_ the people, and they
did contend together concerning the equal division of power, so that
it was _a time_ of confusion, no man knowing what he would get _of
it_.

7 Verily, it was like unto a cauldron of boiling broth wherein the
meat _cometh_ up according to the seething of it; and whosoever did
clutch _at_ a piece, he adventured to find it too hot.

8 And some did make peace, and some did make war; and some did borrow
money, but none did repay it _unto_ the lenders.

9 And every man in the land, _he was_ equal unto his fellows; and
more so was it _so_ with them that did rightly choose the leader to
be over them.

10 ¶ Yea, the wise of an high estate, they were brought _down_ very
low; and the foolish of low degree, they were lifted up higher than
_these_.

11 ¶ Now there was one amongst the kings of Eur, and his name, it was
Tino, the king of the Greeks.  And Sophia, that was sister unto
Willi, the king of Hu, she had _taken_ him to husband.  Yea, verily,
_she had_ taken him.

12 And Tino was a crafty man and artful.  And whensoever he did
speak, behold, there was oil _upon_ his words, so that afterwards he
could slide them both this way and _also_ that way, as did him most
advantage.

13 Verily, he was as full of lies as the hide of a dog is full of
fleas; and he was _for ever_ scheming for to hurt the people of En.

14 And after he had continued in his evil ways _for_ a long time,
then did all the peoples that were joined together against the men of
Hu cry out in a loud voice, saying with one accord, Is there no one
_amongst_ all our brethren that will rid us of this turbulent beast?

15 And there was one, amongst them, a _certain_ man, and his name, it
was Jon.  And he straightway set sail in a boat, and on the third day
he came to Athens.

16 ¶ And _after_ he was arrived there, he did make his way into the
presence of Tino, that was the king, and he did smite him _one_.

17 Yea, he lifted up his foot against him, and did catch him _with_ a
lusty stroke.

18 And he commanded his servants that they should bring him a caravan
for to carry Tino thence.  And Sophia did he put _into_ it also, and
Tino's oxen, and his ass, and everything _that was_ his.

19 ¶ And after it was ready, then did Tino get him thence.  And he
departed into a far country, even unto _that_ place where his caravan
now resteth.

20 And _he did_ leave his second born for to rule in his stead,
thinking in his heart, This one, he shall keep warm _the seat_ for me.

21 Now when word was brought unto Willi _concerning_ Tino, that was
his brother, and _concerning_ all the things that had happened unto
him, then waxed he very wroth.

22 ¶ And he spake unto all the nations of the earth, crying out in a
loud voice, and saying, Who _shall_ lay hands on the king?  And who
lay hands on the Lord's anointed?

23 Verily, the time draweth nigh when I will vanquish mine enemies
utterly, and Tino, he shall go up _again_ unto that place from whence
_he hath_ come down.

24 ¶ And after he had spoken these _words_ unto all the nations of
the earth, then did he repair unto the secret chamber of his palace.
And he called unto him certain of his servants; and Mud, that was his
son, him _also_ did he call unto him.

25 And he put on sackcloth and ashes and did raise his voice in
lamentation over Tino, and over Sophia, _that was_ his wife, saying,
How are the mighty fallen, and _those_ of an high estate cast down
from their high places!

26 I am disturbed _because_ of thee, my Tino, for thou wert more unto
me than a brother.  Very pleasant hast thou been unto me, and
wonderful thy ways _towards_ me.

27 Thine heart, _it was_ deeper than water, and thy tongue as subtil
as the smile of a woman _that_ knoweth.

28 The ball of _thine_ eye was a full moon that ripeneth corn, and
thy teeth stood _out_ like sentinels of ivory without the gate of
Paradise.

29 Thou _hast_ fallen very low, my Tino; very low hast thou fallen
indeed, for thou liest with thy face in the dust, neither is there
any help _in_ thee.

30 How are the mighty fallen, and _those_ of an high estate cast down
from their high places!




CHAPTER VI.

1 _The rulers send unto Artemas_.  4 _He seeketh the Lord High
Physician_.  22 _And findeth him_.  23 _One carrieth a multitude of
papers_.  27 _A man of fat hoppeth wonderfully_.  31 _The scribe
performeth also_.  37 _Wherefore he is sent away_.


Now it came to pass that the rulers sent word unto me, _saying_,
Stand forth, and show thyself unto a physician, for we have need of
thee to smite the men of Hu.

2 And I rose up from my bed _and_ anointed myself with sweet oil and
did shave the hair from off my face _with_ a razor.

3 And I did don my richest apparel and did put in the pocket of _it_
a brush for the teeth, fearing lest they should _straightway_ send me
into battle, and mine habitation, I should see it no more.

41 ¶ And after I was made ready, _I did_ hie me unto the place
appointed.

5 Now when I was come there, I saw a man; and he was one of the
fighters of En, being _also_ a scribe.

6 And I drew nigh unto him, and I did salute him saying, Peace be
unto thee, brother, and peace be _upon thy_ father's house.
Nevertheless, he heeded me not, but did continue in the task that he
was doing.

7 And after he had writ all _that which_ he was minded to write, and
more also, then lifted he his eyes towards me.  And he spake unto me
in a _voice_ of thunder, saying, Wots-yer nime?

8 And because the language that he spake, it was strange unto mine
ear, and because the look upon his face, _it was_ terrible, therefore
did I seek for to pacify him.

9 And I said unto him, Whatsoever thou hast _said_, verily, it is so;
and who be I to gainsay thee?  But what be the _meaning_ of it, that
indeed I know not.

10 Now there was one that _came_ after me, a young man, benign of
countenance; and he did understand the meaning _of it_, and he
interpreted it unto me,

11 So I made answer, and I said unto him _that_ asked, Behold I am a
citizen of Lon, a poor scribe, and my name, _it is_ Artemas.

12 Wherefore he did write down Artemus.  And _after_ he had written
it so, he spake unto me again, saying, Get thee to the physician,
that we may know what _manner_ of man thou art.  And I gat me thence.

13 And I came unto a certain place, where four winds _did_ meet.  And
I did take _up_ my stand in that corner of it that was most draughty;
and I did wait.

14 And after I was become hardened by _the length_ of my vigil, then
did the Lord High Physician send out an herald.

15 And he stood upon the step _of the_ house wherein the physician
was hid, and he called out in a loud voice, saying, Artemus.

16 And the eyes of them that were round _about_, they did look on me
with envy; and there was hate in their hearts also because I was
summoned for to go up _before_ them.

17 And when I was come within the house, behold, _there was_ a man,
and he commanded me that I should take off my raiment, that was also
my richest apparel.  Yea, whatsoever I did _have_ on, that did he
command me _to_ take off.

18 And the mandate troubled me greatly, for I was a young _man_ and
loth to reveal my loveliness _before_ all the world.

19 And because I was backward in setting about it, therefore did he
hearten me _with_ words; yea, he did bid me that I should get me a
move _on_.

20 And I did get me a move _on_; but all else _I did_ get me off.

21 And when I was become naked enough, then did he measure the height
of my stature, and _what_ it was.  And I was weighed in the balance,
also, _and_ found wanting.  And afterwards he did take me unto the
Lord High Physician.

22 ¶ And there were others in that _room_, being in like straits to
myself.  And each _of us_ did eye his fellows with a great contempt,
for, verily, _we were_ a sorry lot, and strangely made.

23 ¶ Now he that went up before me, he did carry in his hand a
multitude of papers.  And he spake unto the Lord High Physician, and
_he said_ unto him, Behold, I am sick unto death.

24 And after the Lord High Physician had taken stock _of him_, and
after he had read that which was writ upon the papers, then spake he
unto the young man, and he said,

25 It seemeth unto me that thou art a vigorous youth and hefty.  But
if, peradventure, _thou art_ sick unto death, what _matter_ the means
to thy end?  And he did send him forth.

26 And the young man was amazed, for he had paid one hundred talents
of gold for _that which_ was writ upon the papers, being assured that
he might work the matter by _force_ of their numbers.

27 ¶ And after him there stood forth another.  And he was a man given
_over_ to fatness, so that even in his resting moments he was
continually _out of_ breath.

28 And the Lord High Physician _spake_ unto him in these words,
saying, Stand thou upon thy right leg, _and_ hop; and he did hop.

29 And the Lord High Physician spake unto him again, _saying_, Stand
thou now upon thy left leg, _and_ hop; and he did hop upon his left
leg also.

30 And, behold, his stomach, it did shake _before_ him, for it was
_of a_ size, and loose withal.  Wherefore, the hopping of him, _it
was_ a matter of delight.

31 ¶ And after it was finished, then did the Lord High Physician
command me to stand forth; and _I did_ stand forth.

32 And when he had seen me, _what_ I was, he said unto the scribe
that attended him, Verily, this man's nakedness _becometh_ him ill,
and his body, it lacketh meat.  So let _it be_ recorded of him.

33 And he spake unto me again, saying, Read now the symbols that
_thou seest_ before thee.  And because they were _beyond_ the sight
of mine eye, therefore spake he unto the scribe again, saying unto
him, Verily, the fool hath not even eyes to see.  So let _it be_
recorded of him.

34 And he did smite me upon the chest, and he ordered me _to say_
unto him, Ninety-nine.

35 And he did smite me upon the stomach, being in a tender place, and
on _the top_ of the back did he smite me also.

36 And he commanded me that I should perform the hop; and I did
perform it.  And I did do other things _also_, and did disport myself
_about_ the floor.  And the eyes _of_ the man of fat, they were
filled with satisfaction.

37 ¶ And after the Lord High Physician, he had marked me for _what_ I
was, he called a servant unto him, and he commanded him, saying, Take
thou _this_ man out of my sight.  And I departed out of his sight for
ever.

38 And I returned unto mine habitation, taking also the brush for the
teeth that I had brought away.

39 Neither did the rulers send unto me again, for _what_ I was, it
was writ upon the records, and _what_ I was, behold, _it was_ enough.




CHAPTER VII.

1 _Concerning the peace-mongers_.  8 _Willi speaketh concerning
peace_.  10 _And expoundeth the meaning of the word_.  15 _Artemas
beholdeth a vision_.  21 _Wherein David slayeth his thousands_.  26
_And meeteth with Willi and Mud_.


Now there were certain men in the land of En, and their talk was _for
ever_ concerning peace.

2 And the _manner_ of its attainment, this considered they not at
all; neither did they concern _themselves_ with the price to be paid
for the blessings of it.

3 And though they were few _in number_, nevertheless, they were loud
of voice; and a man that shouteth out, he is heard above a thousand
_that be_ silent.

4 And there was no reason _in them_, nor any words in their mouths
save only, Peace, peace, peace.

5 And if one said _unto them_, Will ye crave peace _of_ a tyrant?
Then would they make answer, and they would say, Give us _only_ peace.

6 And whosoever questioned them, saying, How long this peace, and in
what manner _shall it_ be assured?  And would ye that our sons be
dead in a lost cause?  To him would they make answer, and they would
say, Give us _only_ peace.

7 And because there was no other word ready unto their tongues,
therefore _some_ called them Boloscheviks, and _some_ did call them
mad; but many did call them merely traitors.

8 ¶ Now, when Willi, that was the king of Hu, _did speak_ concerning
peace, a certain man _that was_ of Amer, he approached unto him, and
he questioned him, saying, Explain me now this peace, and expound
_its meaning_ unto me.

9 And tell me also, I beseech thee, what things be requisite _of_
thine enemies that _peace_ may come unto all peoples?

10 ¶ And Willi did expound the _meaning_ of the word, even as the man
of Amer did beseech him.  And he spake unto him in these words,
saying,

11 This and that also shall our enemies perform.  And they shall
return unto us _all those_ lands which they have taken away; and we
will behave in _like manner_ unto them, keeping only _whatsoever_
seemeth good unto us.

12 And there shall be a making _right_ of the boundaries that do
separate us from our neighbours; _peradventure_, they shall lose a
little in the doing of it.

13 And the might of the Most High Lord of War, it shall be acclaimed
of all the world; and _afterwards_ there shall be peace.

14 And the man of Amer, he spake unto Willi, and he said unto him,
Verily, the peace, _concerning_ which thou hast spoken unto me, it is
_indeed_ the peace that passeth understanding.

15 ¶ Now it fell out on a time, that I, being Artemas, the scribe,
did fall into a deep sleep.  And whilst I slumbered, lo! a vision
came _unto me_ in a dream, and I beheld _things_.

16 And I saw a river that was wide; and the beginning and the end _of
it_, they did reach beyond man's sight.

17 And on one side of the river, _it was_ War; and on the other side
of the river, _it was_ Peace.

18 And, even as _I looked_, there came one David, a man of Cam, and
chief amongst the rulers in the land of En.

19 And in _his_ right hand he did carry a flaming sword; and in _his_
left hand he did carry a picture of the man Winston.  And he took up
_his stand_ at the crossing over of the river.

20 And it came to pass that the hosts of Hu drew nigh, fleeing before
the swords of their adversaries.  And they came unto the _crossing
over_ of the river.

21 ¶ And David said _unto him_ that was first, Whither goest thou?
And he replied _unto him_, saying, I go unto the Land of Peace.
Suffer me, I beseech thee, that I may pass over.

22 And David cast an eye upon him.  And he said unto him, Say now,
_therefore_, Best oration.  And, behold, he could not frame to
pronounce it right, for the word, it was a stranger in his mouth.

23 But he spake as one afflicted _of his_ speech, and did stutter
most abominably.

24 And David took him; and he lifted high the flaming sword and slew
him at the _crossing over_ of the river.

25 And so it was with all that came up thither, _because_ they could
not frame to pronounce _it_ right; wherefore many perished on that
day.

26 ¶ And when David had made an end of all _of them_, a noise of
trembling arose.  And I did see Willi, that _was_ the king of Hu.

27 And Mud, that was his son, behold, he was _with him_; and they
were hid amongst the rushes _of_ the river.

28 And when David saw them, he beckoned _with_ his finger, saying
unto them, Come hither, ye laggards, and ye that are hanging behind.
Come, for _this_ is the passage to Peace.  _Nevertheless_ they came
not unto him.

29 And when he perceived that they came not unto him, then did he
take off his garments from _about_ him, and he descended unto them in
all his awfulness.

30 And in _his_ right hand he did carry the flaming sword; and in
_his_ left hand he did carry a picture of the man Winston.

31 And when he was come _amongst_ them, he did raise up the flaming
sword on high, and he said unto them, Say now, therefore, Restoration.

32 And on the instant I did wake, and my dream, it was flown away.
Neither was it vouchsafed unto me again for to see the end of the
vision.




CHAPTER VIII.

1 _Sundry happenings in En_.  5 _The women are full of foreboding_.
10 _Concerning the Flag Days_.  14 _The men cry aloud_.  18 _And are
succoured_.  20 _Concerning lotteries_.  29 _Much money is brought by
the people_.  30 _Wherefore the rulers awaken_.


Now these things happened in the land of En, and _these are_ the
things that did come to pass.

2 And howsoever a matter fell out, then did men say, Verily, it is
_so_ because of the war.

3 Yet, it was _a reason_ for all the things that were left undone;
and the things that were done, these also it _did_ fully justify.

4 Wherefore many waxed uneasy, fearing how it would be _for them_
when the war, it should be over.

5 ¶ Now the women of the land, they were full of foreboding, knowing
not when their garments, they _might be_ taken from them.

6 And they did _make_ pretence, the one unto the other, concerning
their purple and concerning their fine linen also.

7 And they would speak in this wise, _saying_, Dost thou perceive the
poverty of mine apparel, and _how_ frugal I am become in the matter
of it?

8 Therefore do I wear these _poor_ rags that thou seest, having none
others, save only _some_.  And they would shed a few tears for the
hardness of their lot.

9 Nevertheless, the vendors of apparel _did_ flourish in that day;
neither did the women of the land go naked _before_ the world.

10 ¶ Now the days that men called Flag Days, they did grow _in
number_ beyond all computation.

11 And the sellers _of_ flags, they did infest every place, so that
to escape from them, _it was_ beyond the power of man.

12 And whensoever a man did venture forth from his habitation on a
day _that was a_ flag day, assuredly, that _man_, he was lost.

13 And the damsels and the old women also, they would follow _after
him_, and they would ensnare him by the way.

14 ¶ Wherefore all the men lifted _up_ their voices unto heaven, and
they cried aloud in _their_ distress.  And the rulers heard them.

15 And they sent unto the sellers _of_ flags, even unto the damsels
and unto the old women _did they_ send, and they said unto them,

16 Forasmuch as ye have harried the men of the land _beyond_ all
reason, and the fighters that were come home, _ye have_ driven them
back into battle;

17 And because ye have followed _after them_, having no pity in your
hearts, _therefore_ shall ye pursue them no more.

18 ¶ But whatsoever place shall be appointed unto you, there shall ye
continue.  Verily, ye shall be even as pillars of salt, and _shall_
stand still.  Neither shall ye remove yourselves _out of_ that very
place.

19 And after the rulers had spoken, it came to pass that a little
rest was vouchsafed _unto_ the men; but the damsels, and the old
women also, _they were_ sad and sore at heart.

20 ¶ Now because _there was_ need of money for to buy the munitions
of war, and because it was necessary for _other things_ also,
therefore did the rulers set them about for to get it.

21 And there were certain men and they said, Let us now make us a
lottery, and let there be a prize _to it_ also.

22 Peradventure the people will bring them a mighty weight of money
_for_ the hazard, and the treasury, it will become full up _and_
flowing over.

23 And though every man did agree that it was so, nevertheless, the
rulers, they dared not _to do_ it.

24 For they feared the Pharisees that did speak in their tabernacles
against it.  And the Pharisees at that _time_, they were a power in
the land of En.

25 Nevertheless, it did come to pass in otherwise.  For _there were_
two bazaars in the city of Lon; and the one was _of_ Har, and the
other, it was _of_ Sel.

26 And they set them up counters that the people might bring them
_money_ for to lend it unto the rulers; also, they made them a
lottery _of it_.

27 And when _the matter_ of their design, it was noised abroad, and
that they did scheme to make them a lottery _of it_.

28 Then all the people hied them thither _with_ one accord, and they
did lend them money unto the rulers with a very ready hand.

29 ¶ And after it was all counted up, behold, _the sum_ of it was
very great, passing all belief.

30 ¶ But when the rulers heard about it, they sent word unto the
bazaars, commanding them that they should do _this thing_ no more.

31 Nevertheless, they forbad not the hazard _in a_ race, which
profiteth only a few.

32 Yet were they loth to suffer a lottery, that was made to advantage
_the course_ of the war.




CHAPTER IX.

1 _Concerning food_.  4 _The people do wait in a line_.  11 _And seek
the truth_.  13 _An old man lacketh butter_.  17 _He getteth all
else_.  18 _Concerning the cards_.  24 _Certain of the people do
hoard_.  26 _They pay the penalty_.  27 _The prudent man and the
woman that had no sugar_.


Now there came a time when there was no more food in En save _only_
enough for to feed the people.

2 And the gluttons of the land cried out in their vexation, _because_
they glutted them no more.

3 And it became a custom _amongst_ the people that they should hie
them unto the bazaar for to wait _without_ the portal of it.

4 ¶ And they would gather themselves together _in a_ line hoping
that, perchance, a little meat would be vouchsafed unto them.

5 And they did complain loudly amongst themselves and did make their
faces _of a length_; and they cursed the rulers shamefully.

6 Yea, there were many that forgot _it was_ a time of war, for their
minds were not on it, being gone _down_ into their stomachs.

7 Now it fell out on a night that I pursued my way along an highway
in the city of Lon.

8 And, behold, there was a multitude of people, being _in a_ line,
and it reached unto a long _way_ off.

9 And I perceived that they were a merry lot _and_ full of mirth.
Yea, they were _like_ unto none of them that I had seen before.

10 And I drew nigh unto them, for I was amazed.  And I sought to
inquire what manner of victuals it was that _did put_ them in the
humour.

11 ¶ And when I was come near _enough_, then did I see the name of it
and _what_ it was, and behold, that _which_ they waited for, it was
Nothing but the Truth.

12 And so _it was_ in the land, that to buy of laughter, they grudged
them not the waiting; but to get them a morsel of food, that was _a
matter_ in other wise.

13 ¶ Now there was a certain man, and he was an old man and full of
cunning; and his stomach, it did trouble him for _a little_ butter.

14 Wherefore he writ him a list, and he did put down all the things
that he needed not; and in the midmost part of it, he put down also
_a little_ butter.

15 And after it was writ, he sent it unto the bazaar, hoping by this
means to get him that for _which_ his soul did crave; and he prayed
without ceasing all that night.

16 And when it was morning, there came one from the bazaar unto his
habitation; and he did bring with him all those things that the old
man, which was full of cunning, he had put down.

17 ¶ Yea, all _of them_ did he bring save only _a little_ butter for
to fortify the old man's faith in prayer.

18 ¶ Now these were the days of cards, and the number of them, it
increased continually.

19 And there were food cards, and fuel cards, and cards of
registration, and sugar cards, and cards of insurance, and cards of
exemption also.

20 And whosoever did lose his cards, verily, the state of that man,
it _was_ terrible.

21 For he could get him no sustenance for to live.  And a man that is
not insured, to die were the last of his follies.

22 Moreover, because the card of his exemption, it was lost,
therefore, in _either_ case, he was become of the fighters of En.

23 Yea, even though he were possessed of the joker, nevertheless, it
availed him nothing; for it was a new game, and the joker was not in
the pack.

24 ¶ And certain of the people did gather them victuals secretly and
in great abundance, and they did put them on one side and _they did_
hoard.

25 Neither did they consider the needs of the poor, being satisfied
with their own bellies, that they should be full up.

26 ¶ And they did pay for their selfishness in the penalty; yea, for
the mighty atom that they did hide away, they paid for it in the
penalty.

27 ¶ Now there was a certain man of the land of En, and he was the
father of many children; wherefore he was become prudent, and he was
for ever looking _in front_ of him.

28 And it came to pass that he did go unto an inn.  And he commanded
the servant that was there, saying unto him, Bring me a measure of
tea, that _I may_ drink.

29 And the servant did bring him the measure of tea, and he did set
it down _before_ him.  And he that would drink, he did take from his
pocket a little _white_ sugar.

30 And after he had used _of it_, he did put upon the table that
sugar _which_ was remaining over.

31 Now there was a certain woman sitting nigh unto him.  And her
husband, _that_ was a great man, he did sit _beside her_.  And she
was garbed in new purple.

32 And there was a great weight of precious jewels _upon her_, yea,
even unto the fastenings of her sandals _was_ she bright with
precious gems.

33 And she did look _at_ the sugar greedily, for she coveted it.  And
_because_ she was too proud to steal, therefore did she approach unto
the man.

34 And she threw herself _down_ at his feet and she buried her face
in the dust, crying out, My lord, my lord, see _how_ thine handmaiden
prostrateth herself before thee.

35 And he said unto her, Woman, arise.  And she rose up.  And he
spake unto her again, _saying_, Tell me, I beseech thee, _the reason_
of thy supplication; for he was full of prudence, and, because she
was a woman, therefore did he trust her not.

36 And after she had kissed his hand, she said unto him, Behold, my
lord, thine handmaiden hath got her a measure of tea, _and_ it
lacketh sweetness.

37 Therefore, I pray thee that thou givest _unto me_ a morsel of
sugar, for thy servant, she thirsteth mightily.

38 And when he saw how _it was_ with her, he gave her a morsel of
sugar, being the sugar that _he had_ brought with him.

39 And after she had blessed his name, _and_ the name of his father,
_and_ all his seed also, she returned unto her husband being well
content.

40 And this was a thing that _did_ happen because there was war in
the land.




CHAPTER X.

1 _The fighters from afar off_.  4 _Concerning the men of Cann_.  10
_Concerning the men of Anz_.  20 _Concerning the men of Saf_.  24
_The greeting of the damsels_.  27 _One is chosen_.  31 _She uses
artifice_.  34 _The means of escape_.


Now _there was_ in the host of En a great number of men that did come
from afar off; neither considered they distance as anything _against_
the righteousness of a just cause.

2 And there were men of Anz, and men of Cann, and men of Ind, and men
of Saf, and men that did come _from_ other lands also.  And all of
them were hardy men and full of valour, so that no man could say
_concerning_ them, Behold, these people, they are more valiant _than_
the others.

3 And when they went out _for_ to fight, there were never men more
terrible than these.  Yea, in the heat of the battle, there was not
_one_ of the men of Hu that could stand up _against_ them.

4 ¶ Now, the men of Cann were very bold, _being_ strenuous of purpose
and knowing not fear.  Also, _they were_ full of a great vim.

5 And it came to pass that they were sent against one _of the_
strongholds of the men of Hu.  And it was a place that was girded
round with cunning devices, and the fortifications _of it_, they were
stronger than iron.

6 And when they had pitched their camp _before_ it, behold, all the
garrison did band themselves together, and they did arm themselves
with mighty weapons, being resolved that the men of Cann, they should
not take that _place_.

I Nevertheless, their resistance, _it_ availed them nothing; neither
was there any power either of earth or of hell for to stay the men of
Cann in the violence _of their_ onslaught.

8 For they were a valiant lot, scornful _of_ danger and unafraid to
die.  Also, _they were_ full of a great vim.

9 Wherefore, they called the name of that place Vimy Ridge, meaning,
_because_ it was taken with a great vim.  And so it is known even
unto this day.

10 ¶ Now the men of Anz did come from a land at the other _side_ of
the earth, being six weeks journey _in_ a ship.

11 And certain _of them_ were sent unto Egypt for to make them ready
to fight; and they sojourned there many days.

12 And the fire of their ardour burned very bright in that land; yea,
the flame of it did blaze forth _even_ as a living thing.

13 Now there was a _certain_ rock that was set in the sea, being an
high rock and formidable.  And _it was_ in the hands of the enemy.

14 And because of the bravery of the men of Anz, therefore were they
charged _with_ the taking of it.

15 And they went out against it in boats; yea, in little _boats_ did
they row them up for to take it.

16 And every contrivance of man and all the inventions of the devil,
they were turned _against_ them for to drive them back.

17 Nevertheless, they gat them on; even unto the high rock did _they_
get them on.

18 And when they were come up _to it_, they descended out of their
boats, and they _did_ take it by the strength of a mighty attack.
Yea, they did climb unto the top of the high rock, _and_ they did
take it.

19 And in all the war there was no deed done _that was_ more valiant
than this.

20 ¶ Now the men of Saf were divided into two parts.  And some _of
them_ did come unto En for to be with the host; and some _of them_
did fight against the men of Hu in Geaf, being _that_ land which was
next unto Saf.

21 And they prospered exceedingly in their enterprises, so _that
they_ were famed for renown amongst all the peoples of the earth.

22 And they did capture the land of Geaf by the edge _of the_ sword;
even from the men of Hu did they capture it.

23 Nevertheless, it was an harassing task and full of peril;
wherefore the glory of their triumph, it did shed a light _upon_
their name that shall last for ever more.

24 ¶ Now whensoever it happened that a fighter, _being_ of a land
afar off, did come unto the city of Lon, then would the damsels make
them _ready_ for to greet him.

25 And they would _put on_ their chief raiment, and they would go
down unto the gates of the city for to meet him; and they would show
their teeth _at him_, and would allure him with sundry blandishments.

26 And they would get him amongst them, and would take him on one
_side_.  And they would speak unto him, _with_ subtil words.  And
each of them would strive to entice him unto _her way_.

27 ¶ And _after_ he had sorted them out, the one from the other, the
wheat from the chaff, and the corn from the tares, then would he go
forth _with her_.

28 And she would be a guide unto him, and a friend also.  And she
would show him _things_ and would whisper in his ear.

29 And she would speak unto him _concerning_ his own land, being a
country whither she was for a long _time_ back inclined.

30 And she would look at him in a _certain_ way; yea, notwithstanding
that he needed not a spur, nevertheless, she _would_ urge him with
her eyes.  And because he had chosen her _above_ all the others,
therefore would he caress her.

31 ¶ And after that he had caressed her to her liking, so that her
soul cried _out_ for more, then would she seek for _to gather_ him in.

32 And she would speak unto him concerning her _points_ and
concerning the things that she could do.  Yea, she would fill her
mouth _with_ lies, seeking to make herself perfect.

33 And she would look upon him with large eyes; and she would say
unto him, Verily, _thou art_ a man; and thy strength, it terrifieth
me.  And if he strove for to comfort her _because_ she feared his
strength, then was he lost indeed.

34 ¶ Yea, unless he had taken unto himself a wife _before_, there was
no help in him.  For the wiles of the damsels, they worked in devious
ways; but the end of the ways, assuredly, it was _for ever_ the same.




CHAPTER XI.

1 _Concerning one that abhorred strange tongues_.  3 _He meeteth with
a damsel_.  14 _And falleth unto her_.  15 _Concerning the writing on
the board_.  24 _A certain man disturbeth his companions_.  29 _He is
delivered from tribulation_.  33 _Whereby another suffereth in his
stead_.


Concerning sundry happenings that befell the fighters of En _when_
they went out with the host.

2 Now there was a _certain_ man that went unto the war.  And when he
was arrived nigh unto the camp, he was commanded to seek a certain
habitation and to sojourn there.

3 ¶ And on the morrow after he was come into that house, he beheld a
damsel.  And, lo, _she was_ fair as the blossom of the pomegranate
and graceful as a roe that skippeth _upon_ the mountains.

4 And her neck, it was like unto a tower _that is_ of ivory, and
there was red upon her lips; also, she had doves' eyes _and_ full of
softness.

5 Now in his youth he had _given_ him over unto idleness, heeding not
instruction and scorning all strange speech.  But the time of his
repentance, it was at hand, _because_ he had no words for to tell her
all that which was in his heart.

6 Nevertheless, after he had gazed long _enough_ upon the beauty of
her, he was moved to make him trial with his tongue.  And he spake
unto her despairingly in _these_ words, saying Hast thou the coat
_of_ my father?

7 And because he could not _frame_ to pronounce it right, therefore
did she understand him not.  Nevertheless, she did smile upon him for
himself, and because of _the way_ of him also.

8 And when the next day was come, he espied _the maiden_ from his
window; and she was walking in the courtyard of their habitation.
And he descended unto her, seeking advancement in _her_ eyes.

9 And when he had greeted her _with_ his hand, and had put his
countenance in _the shape of_ his adoration, then spake he more words
_after_ the manner of before.  And he said unto her, Hast thou a
morsel of bread?  Nay, my friend, but _I have_ a little cheese.

10 Nevertheless, she understood no word of _all_ that which he did
say.  But because he spake from out of his _depths_, therefore did
she perceive _the nature_ of his ailment.

11 Now after the passing of the fourteenth day, _he did_ come upon
the damsel unattended and alone, in a place apart that was well
screened.  And, behold, his speech _was_ all used up; neither had she
understood _the meaning_ of any of it.

12 And there remained unto him no words, _save_ only two.  And
because she had understood him not before, therefore spake he _them_
unto him, and he said, Jer tame.

13 And, lo, she held up her mouth on the instant, and _with_ her arms
she did seize him forthwith; yea, _she was_ filled with a great
understanding.

14 ¶ And because he had put _the matter_ at hazard, therefore did he
fall _unto her_ on that day.

15 ¶ Now there was a certain stripling of the men of En, and he was
journeying along a ditch, being nigh unto _that place_ where the host
of Hu, it was encamped.

16 And it was a shallow ditch, _having_ no depth, and his path, it
was beset with dangers.  Wherefore he tarried not by the way.

17 And as he hasted him along, _behold_, there was a board, and it
stood up against him; and there was writing _on the board_.  And he
stayed the order of his going for to read it.

18 Now the missiles of the enemy, they were sent _against_ that spot
like the grains of a desert of sand being lifted by the wind.

19 Nevertheless, he was full of determination for _to get_ him unto
the board.  Wherefore he did lay him flat upon the ground; yea, even
as a worm doth travel, in like _manner_ approached he unto the board.

20.  And when _he was_ come thither (and by reason of his
perseverance, _he did_ come thither), lo, the writing, it was made
plain unto him; and he did see it, _what_ it was.

21 And the words of it, being interpreted, _did say_, Get thee hence,
O fool, whilst yet thou remainest whole.  For whosoever tarrieth
here, verily, he _shall be_ cut off in the height of his folly.

22 And after he had seen the writing, _what_ it was, he did get him
thence; even as he came, that was in the manner of a worm, he did go
away from _that_ same place.

23 And the curses that fell from that man's mouth, they did _shake_
the two encampments.

24 ¶ Now there was a certain man, being a fighter of the land of En,
and in the innocence of _his_ youth, he had taken unto himself a wife.

25 And she was a woman loose of the jaw, so that _there was_ no peace
on earth for him.  Yea, neither in the day _nor_ in the night was any
peace vouchsafed unto him.

26 And when he was come amongst the host, he complained unto his
companions continually _concerning_ the soreness of his lot; and the
voice of his groaning was ofttimes _heard_ in the starry watches of
the night.

27 And after they had borne with him for a long time _without_ any
respite, they were filled with a great hatred against that woman,
_that_ she should trouble them so.  Yea, they abominated her utterly.

28 And they conspired together for to deliver him, perceiving that
_there was_ no other means unto their own salvation.

29 ¶ Wherefore it came to pass after the next occasion when they did
go _against_ the enemy, that they sent them word unto the officer
that was appointed, and they said unto him,

30 In the heat of the encounter, in the forefront of the battle, _he
was_ smitten unto death.  Also, we did bury him underneath the earth
for _to make_ assurance certain.

31 And when they told him that _he was_ dead, it rejoiced him
greatly.  And from that day forth he was as other men.

32 But when his wife did hear about it, she put on sackcloth and
ashes, and, _during_ seven days, she did weep in the public places of
the city, crying out in a loud voice, and saying, My husband, Oh, my
husband.

33 ¶ And on the eighth _day_ she gat her another.




CHAPTER XII.

1 _The women upbraid one another_.  5 _The virgins that made them
munitions for the war_.  12 _Their anger_.  14 _They are appeased_.
15 _Concerning the choice of an habitation_.  25 _A chief factor
donneth wondrous apparel_.  33 _Wherefor one believeth him to be the
keeper of the gate_.


Now in the seventh month of the year and the first _week_ of the
month upon the second day, all the women of the land rose up together
and they made them an outcry, the one _against_ the other.

2 And they upbraided them that were barren, because they bore not
children; and those that had begotten _a few_, they exhorted them to
continue _along_ the way.

3 And the hearts of _the women_ were stirred within them, and the cry
of their sisters, it filled them with zeal for the undertaking.

4 Nevertheless, there were certain men in the land that scoffed
aloud, saying, By the fruits of their labour _only_ shall ye know
them; and the words _that_ flow from a woman's mouth, what man shall
give them a meaning?

5 ¶ Now there was a certain place in the land of En and it was _full
up_ of workers that did make them munitions for the war.

6 And there were many women _amongst_ them also; and some of them
were married unto men; and the others, they were virgins.

7 Wherefore it came to pass that the ruler of that place, he made him
a plan; and, behold, _it was_ after this manner.

8 And he did design that whosoever amongst them should conceive and
be with child, there should be provision made for that woman to
sustain her during _the time_.

9 And whosoever amongst them should be spoken for in marriage, unto
her there should be given _so much_ for her portion.

10 Now the tongue of rumour was very busy in that place, _being_ a
place where women were, and many strange things were noised abroad
_amongst_ them.

11 And it was reported that all the virgins, they must straightway
get themselves _with_ child; also, that there was offered a reward
_unto her_ that was the first amongst them for to do it; and the
reward, _it was_ in fifty shekels of gold.

12 ¶ And when the virgins heard _about_ it, they waxed very wroth.
And they did tear their hair in the violence of their rage; and with
their mouths they _did_ utter terrible sayings.

13 And they did say, Are we, then, _women_ of Hu that we should do
this wicked thing?  Nay, the price of a virtuous woman, it is far
_above_ fifty shekels of gold.

14 ¶ And after they had vented the violence of their indignation,
then was the matter expounded unto them; and their anger, _it was_
appeased.

15 ¶ Now it came to pass that the rulers did make them councillors
for _to be_ over the fighters of the air.

16 And after it was done, and they beheld their handiwork, _they
said_, the one unto the other, Let us now get them an habitation lest
the rain come down and _they be_ spoilt.

17 So they sent out messengers through all the city of Lon bidding
them spy out the land for to find an house _that was_ suitable unto
the purpose.

18 And on the seventh day the messengers returned unto them, bringing
word that they had found them an house, _and_ suitable.  And, behold,
they did purport to put the councillors inside a large building,
_being_ a museum.

19 And when the rulers spake unto the people, and told them about it,
a great clamour arose _on the_ instant.  And all the wise men did
take up their pens, and _they did_ write.  And the foolish, also,
they did write them epistles as well.

20.  And _because_ in the eyes of the rulers it was a proper
habitation, _and_ suitable, therefore did they stand up against the
voice of the people for a long time.  And they said unto them,

21 Who _are ye_ to make a noise and in what manner doth it concern
you?  Ye know full well that in _that_ place are men of Egypt,
ancient in years _and_ full of wisdom.  Nevertheless, they complain
not, _neither_ do they cry out.

22 But the people ceased not from their clamouring; and the wise men
wrote them more _epistles_, and the foolish wrote in likewise.  But
the men of Egypt spake no word, being ancient in years _and_ full of
wisdom.

23 And it came to pass _in time_ that the rulers, they relented their
resolve.  And they found them another _house_ for the councillors,
saying, Because it is necessary to get them an habitation, lest the
rain come down and _they be_ spoilt.

24 Nevertheless, the house that we did choose before, it was a proper
house, _and_ suitable, because it was big; also, it was a museum.

25 ¶ Now there was a _certain_ merchant that dwelt in the city of
Lon.  And he had taken _unto him_ a chief factor, a bumptious man
that was full of a great conceit.

26 And when the rulers commanded the men of En that they should go up
for _to be_ with the host, then did the chief factor cast about in
his mind for _a means_ whereby he might remain whole.

27 And he arrayed himself in a wonderful coat, _being_ of a blue
colour; and his legs did he cover--even down to his knees did he
cover them--_with_ cloth of a similar hue.  And he put on ornaments
_of_ braid, and trappings _of_ divers kind.

28 And because his legs were thin, being _like_ unto straws of a bad
harvest, therefore was he unstable _upon_ them.  Yea, notwithstanding
the glory of his apparel, nevertheless, _he was_ wonky upon his feet.

29 Now it came to pass that he was sent unto a _certain_ man with
whom his master was wont to make business; and he came _upon him_
suddenly in all his fine array.

30 And he spake unto him, saying, This and that, saith my master.
And the man knew not that he was the chief factor, thinking _only_,
This man, he showeth some understanding; _peradventure_ he will get
him on.

31 Wherefore when another _occasion_ arose, he sent word unto the
merchant, saying, Send thou unto me that _man_, thy servant, whom
thou didst send unto me before, for he is a worthy fellow, knowing
also a little of that _concerning_ which he speaketh.

32 And the merchant said unto him, Tell me further, that I may know
what man _it is_ concerning whom thou speakest.  Then will I search
him out and I send him _unto thee_.

33 ¶ And he answered him, saying, Verily, it is _that man_ whom thou
hast arrayed in wonderful raiment.  By his legs thou _shalt_ know
him; and is he not the keeper _of thy_ door?

34 And the merchant was filled with the light of a great
understanding, and he knew the man, whom _it was_; nevertheless, he
spake no word concerning it, thinking,

35 Assuredly, _it is_ better to have a doorkeeper that possesses wit,
than a factor that _hath_ wonky legs.  Therefore did he open not his
mouth.




CHAPTER XIII.

1 _Darkness continueth in the city_.  2 _The damsels rejoice_.  4
_The young men rejoice_.  6 _The maidens of an age rejoice_.  9 _A
certain man loseth his spouse_.  21 _He findeth consolation_.  24
_The ways of the young things_.


Now the rulers ordained _that_ the city of Lon, it should continue in
darkness; and the hearts of many of the people, they were rejoiced
_because_ of it.

2 ¶ And the damsels rejoiced openly, saying, Verily, _it is_ a time
that aboundeth in possibilities,

3 Peradventure it will embolden _him_ somewhat in the wooing of me,
for love in a dark _place_, assuredly, it needeth no footwarmer.

4 ¶ And the young men rejoiced also, saying, In the dark of the
night, in the very great darkness of the city, there shall I _tell_
her the tale.

5 And after that she is softened _towards_ me, then will I gather her
in.  And I will quench my thirst _at the_ fountain of her lips, and
the rapture of her touch, it shall feed mine appetite _for_ love.

6 ¶ And the maidens _of an_ age, they rejoiced as well.  For she that
was thirty and five years old _when_ it was day, she was judged by
the shortness of her garments _after_ that it was become the night.

7 And many damsels came unto the city of Lon from the country that
was round _about_ it, seeking to avail themselves of the darkness
that _was_ there.

8 And they complained in their villages and in their towns _also_,
saying, Why is the city of Lon favoured _above_ other cities?

9 ¶ Now there was a certain man, and _he was_ wedded unto a wife.
And it came to pass on an occasion that he did go with her along an
highway in Lon at _a time_ when it was dark.  And she was garbed in
raiment that _was_ black, so that he did take hold _upon_ her arm,
fearing lest he should lose her.

10 And whither they were going, that _did_ he know not, save only
that they sought the habitation of a friend, there to partake of
nourishment _and_, perchance, a little wine.

11 And as they walked, behold, she raised her voice _against_ him.
And she did utter bitter sayings; and she told him _how_ he had
troubled her for a long time past.

12 And she told him divers things also concerning himself and
concerning the things that he had done, and concerning the things
that he had left undone.  And afterwards she did steep _herself_ in
silence.

13 And as they proceeded upon their way, no word passing _between_
them, they came unto a place where a multitude of people was gathered
together.

14 And there was one of the multitude that did come between them.
Yea, for a moment the man, _he was_ parted from his wife, and the
grip of his hand, it was loosened from her arm.

15 And when he was free of the multitude, _he was_ filled with doubt
concerning her, and concerning _which_ of them she was.

16 Wherefore he seized an arm _at a_ venture, being the arm of a
woman in raiment of black.  And because she spake no word, therefore
did he know that _it was_ verily his wife.

17 And he continued on the way _with_ her towards the habitation of
her friend; and they came unto an house.  And his spirit grew light
within him _because_ the victual and the wine also, they were become
very near.

18 And whilst they stood _without_ the portal of that house, she that
was his wife, she did open the door of it _with_ a key.  And he was
filled with amazement, nor understood how it was.

19 And she beckoned unto him with her finger, that he should enter
_into_ that house.  And he went in with her.

20 And after _they_ were come inside, she did make her a light, and
he did see.  And, behold, _the woman_, she was not his wife.

21 ¶ Nevertheless, because she was garbed in raiment of black, and
was withal a comely damsel, _being_ not ill favoured, therefore did
he forgive himself his error.

22 And when _the time_ came that he was returned unto his habitation,
he waxed very wroth with his wife.  And he upbraided her soundly
_because_ she had lost him amongst the multitude.

23 And she did forget to question him _concerning_ his doings on that
night, neither did he vouchsafe her any answer concerning them.

24 ¶ Now whensoever it happened that _it was_ night, then did all the
damsels hie them forth into the highways of the city; and their
thoughts were of love _and_ their stomachs.

25 And they would make them _in the likeness_ of a maiden forlorn so
that the young man, his heart was moved by the sight of their
desolation.

26 And he would approach unto them _because_ of their state, and he
would make offer of himself for to be a companion unto them _and_ to
cheer them on their way.

27 And he would say, Knowest thou _whether_ the warning, it hath been
given?  And she would make answer unto him and she would say, Thine
handmaiden, _she_ is a stranger in the city,

28 Nevertheless, she hath received a _warning_ concerning men, that
they be wicked and full of naughtiness.  Therefore, get thee hence,
lest it come to the ears of my mother _about_ thee.

29 And he would reason with her earnestly and he would entreat her
that she _should_ put her trust in him.

30 And when he had pleaded with her long enough, then would she say
unto him, Verily, thou hast inclined me _towards_ thee with the
blandishments of thy tongue.

31 Now, therefore, _let us_ away, for wheresoever thou goest, there
also will I go.  And thou shalt do _unto_ me whatsoever seemeth good
unto thee.

32 And she would take him with her; and wheresoever she did go, there
would he also go.  And whatsoever seemed good _unto_ her, that did
she do unto him.




CHAPTER XIV.

1 _Artemas adviseth the damsels and warneth them_.  9 _Concerning the
choice of an husband_.  14 _And the preparations for his enticement_.
18 _He cautioneth the hasty_.  20 _And counselleth flattery_.  22
_And artifice_.  25 _He returneth again unto the choice of an
husband_.  28 _Concerning the terrible things_.


List not to the words of that man who _hath_ a leaning towards thee,
for he knoweth not _the things_ that he doth say.

2 Let not thine head be uplifted by his flattery, or thy spirit grow
proud _because of_ his praise.

3 Yea, if he compareth thine eyes to the stars, and thy teeth to a
necklet of pearls, and thine ear to a very _rare_ shell, then heed
him not, _for_ he lieth.

4 Remember the rooster; it clucketh _so_ to the old brown hen.
Nevertheless, the countenance of an hen, being that _which_ it is,
hath little of comeliness about it.

5 When a young man cometh unto thee, having buttons a thousand
_times_ burnished, think not that he doeth this thing for thy sake.

6 For it may hap that he but seeketh favour _with_ his captain; or,
perchance, _it is_ his wife that sendeth him out thus.

7 When thy man cometh back from the wars, pry not too deeply into his
carryings on during the time that he was away.

8 For he is a man that hath done very much for thee.  Therefore it is
meet that he should also have done _a little_ for himself.

9 ¶ When thou choosest a young man for to husband thee, mark him with
great circumspection, and regard him closely, _how_ he behaveth
against thy lures.

10 There is one that carrieth upon his arm a coat of burr berri.  He
walketh with thee through the meadows.  And when thy footsteps
falter, lo, he spreadeth it _out_ upon the ground for to be a couch
_unto_ you.

11 That man, he hath the makings of a _safe_ husband, for he
foreseeth things.

12 Yea, verily, such an one _as this_, he shall turn him neither to
the right hand nor to the left hand; but when the _time_ that thou
hast appointed, it _be_ come, then shall he kiss thee full _upon_ the
lips.

13 And he shall place his two arms around thee also, and he shall say
in a manner befitting thy lord all _those_ things that thou hast
willed him to say, so that thou shalt verily believe _for the_
instant that thou hast not worked him.

14 ¶ Whensoever thou goest forth _with_ intent, then shalt thou avail
thyself of the whole might of thine armoury.  Moreover, if there be
anything lacking _in_ thee, scruple not to visit the bazaar for to
equip thyself more fully.

15 Yea, if thy chest offend thee, fill _it_ out; and thy nose also,
if it cometh unto a blue colour by the blast of the wind, a morsel of
fine powder, _it shall_ suffice to restore thy comeliness.

16 Lips of scarlet _and_ the pink cheek; lashes to veil thine eyes in
night, and twilight shadows for the _underneath_;

17 Hair that fulfilleth the young man's desire; and teeth white as
ivory, set out in order.  All _these_ things and more also shalt thou
buy with the money thy father doth get of his labour.

18 ¶ Bring up thy mother in _the way_ she should go and restrain her
continually.  Else shall she hold thee up before the young man's eyes
_without_ ceasing, wherefore thou shalt surely lose him.

19 Consider the worm.  It sitteth _on_ its hook in a quiet place, nor
followeth after the fish.  Nay, rather doth it entice him _because_
it sitteth aloof.  Do thou, therefore, in like manner.

20 ¶ When a young man speaketh unto thee concerning a miracle that
_hath_ saved him his life, then open thine eyes _into_ his, and call
him wonderful.

21 For in this manner shalt thou remove the credit _of it_ from the
miracle and he will believe thy words.  And he will perceive in thee
a multitude of charms that erstwhile had been hid.

22 ¶ When a young man embraceth thee, say not unto him that he is
_the_ first for to do it; else will he think that thou speakest lies;
or, if he believe thee, assuredly he will look for _the reason_ of it.

23 Nay, catch up thy breath in thy throat, and gasp as a bird being
strangled, saying unto him, Oh, Timothy (if _such_ his name shall
be), assuredly art thou _the_ first that hath kissed my lips _like
that_!

24 For then will he believe thee, and thy words _will_ stir him
mightily.  For flattery of the subtil kind, _it_ worketh a man; but
woman, she liketh _it_ very thick.

25 ¶ Choose not a man to husband thee according to his means alone,
but according _to his_ meanness shalt thou choose him also.  For how
shall it profit thee that his pocket _be_ deep, if thine arm be too
short _for_ to fathom it.

26 Neither shalt thou choose him by the stars that _he doth_ wear
upon his arm; for thou makest choice of an husband and not _of a_
liquid to drink.

27 The king of thine heart shalt thou call him, and _also_ the lord
of thy life.  But when thou speakest _concerning_ thy knight of love,
then spell thou _out_ the letters of it; verily, there be room for
misconception hereabouts.

28 ¶ There are three _things which_ are too terrible for me, yea,
four which I know not:

29 The way of a lioness with her cub; the way of a dog _with_ his
bone; the way of a miser _with_ his gold; and the way of a maid
_with_ her man.

30 And whosoever shall meddle with any _of these_, he will rue it the
length of his days.  Neither shall any man feel compassion towards
him, for he is condemned of his own foolishness.




CHAPTER XV.

1 _Concerning the children of Israel_.  4 _Certain of them go up unto
the host_.  9 _Proper men are chosen_.  16 _Jericho is captured by a
stratagem_.  17 _An husbandman entertaineth guests_.  22 _A certain
young man taketh unto himself a wife_.  35 _His sufferings_.


Now there was much perturbation of spirit _amongst_ the children of
Israel because the fliers of Hu, they did come unto the city of Lon.

2 And some of the tribes did hasten to get them _underneath_ the
earth; and some of them _did make_ a great exodus from the city, and
they did pass over unto the shores of the sea.

3 Wherefore the people were in doubt _concerning_ what it was, and
some said, Verily, _it is_ the exodus that but repeateth itself.  But
others made answer unto them, saying, Nay, brother, _rather_ is it
the Passover that happeneth again.

4 ¶ Nevertheless, there were certain of the children of Israel that
behaved in _other_ manner.  And they did go for to be amongst the
host of En.

5 And men did know _this part_ of them for the fighting Judæans, or
King David's Own, or the Kosher Cavalry; yea, whichever of the names
came first unto their lips, by _that name_ did they call them.

6 Now the Levites, that _were_ also Cohens, they complained in a very
low voice because they were not allowed for to go up, saying, Alas,
it is against the law of Moses for us _to do_ this thing.

7 And the chief priest, he heard them.  And _he was_ moved to
compassion by the hardness of their lot.  Wherefore he made him an
ordinance.  And he ordained that they should go up.  Yea, all the
Levites, that were also Cohens, he gave them leave for to join the
host of En.  And some _of them_ rejoiced.

8 Now whensoever a man stood forth for to fight amongst the children
of Israel, _being_ the fighting Judæans, _or_ King David's Own, _or_
the Kosher Cavalry, then did they send unto the chief physician _for_
to make trial of his aptness.

9 ¶ And if the chief physician did say, I have seen this man in _all_
his nakedness, and, behold, he is a proper man to be amongst us, then
_was_ it so.  But if he spake in otherwise, then _was_ it not so.

10 Wherefore it came to pass that they were all men made _unto_ a
certain end; and if there was anything lacking _in them_, verily, it
was but a little thing and beneath notice.

11 Now there was one amongst them, and his mind it was filled with
stratagems.  And, _after_ they had been gathered together for a
length of time, he stood upon his feet, and he spake unto them in
these words, saying,

12 Hail to you, my brothers, and, Hail to you, ye men of Israel!  And
they answered him, _saying_, Hail!  And when he perceived that their
ears, they were turned towards him, he continued with a loud voice,
and he said unto them,

13 What of Jericho, and _what_ about it?  Verily, the city of David,
_it hath_ fallen unto Gentile hosts, but the walls of Jericho,
behold, they are yet whole.  Let us, therefore, _contrive_ the matter.

14 And after that he had reminded them concerning Joshua _that_
behaved in a cunning manner, he commanded them _accordingly_; and he
told each man _the thing_ that he should do.

15 Wherefore it came to pass when the signal was given unto them,
that _they did_ blow upon their noses with a loud blast.  Yea, they
did make a very great noise with their noses _because_ they did do it
all at one _time_.

16 ¶ And when they awoke on the morrow, lo, the walls of Jericho,
_they were_ fallen down.  And all the children of Israel rejoiced in
their tents _because_ they had contrived it; nevertheless, they
imparted unto no man the secret _of the_ blowing.

17 ¶ Now there was a certain man in the land of En that was an
husbandman _and_ of substance.  And he hired him captives of the men
of Hu for to plow his fields _and_ to sow his seeds _and_ to do that
which was requisite and necessary unto his land.

18 And amongst them there was one that had formerly been wont to
shave the beards of his brethren _with_ a razor, and to prepare the
heads of them _with_ scissors.

19 Now in the house _of the_ husbandman there were many guest
chambers, and they were for ever full.  And _whensoever_ it happened
that his friends were come for to visit him _over_ the end of a week,
then would he send unto the man of Hu.

20 And he would set him _at_ the hair of his friends, and he would
bid him take the scissors; yea, whosoever did come for to visit him,
the hair of that man's head, assuredly, _it was_ cut short.

21 Neither was there any help in him, for the husbandman, _he was_
resolved that the opportunity which was come, it should not be idly
cast away.

22 ¶ Now there was a certain young man and he took unto himself a
wife, a comely maid and graceful as a young gazelle.

23 And after that he had rewarded the priest for _all_ that he had
done for him, and after that he had taken leave of the guests that
were bidden to the marriage feast, he departed unto another city; and
the damsel _that was_ his wife, she went with him.

24 For it was a custom in En that those who were newly wed should
steal _away_ secretly unto a place afar off, lest any man should spy
upon them and make him a report _about_ it.

25 And after they had pursued their way for many hours, _they came_
unto an inn, being that hostelry where they did intend to sojourn
through all the night.

26 Now the damsel was a wily sort, _being_ sly and very artful; and
she had made her preparations for to blind the eyes of the curious.

27 Wherefore she did carry her apparel in boxes that _were_ old,
fearing lest any man should laugh and wink his eye because of the
newness _of them_.  And there was writ upon the boxes certain
symbols, being the first letters of her name _of_ yesterday.

28 Now after they had subscribed their names unto certain writings
that were laid _before_ them, it was their single thought to close
their eyes in sleep, for _they were_ weary unto death because of the
journey.

29 But the keeper of the inn, he was a man that _was_ full of
suspicion; and the damsel was comely to look upon.  Therefore he
called the young man unto him.

30 And he said _unto him_, Tarry yet a little while and haste thee
not away, for I would feign commune with thee concerning _a matter_.

31 And he took the young man privately upon one side, and he
questioned him concerning _the matter_.  And he said unto him, Tell
me, I pray thee, the name of the damsel?

32 Now the young man, he had never been married before; also, he was
full of weariness, having an earnest desire to lay him down.  And
because the question, it came on a sudden, therefore did he make
answer _without_ serious meditation.  And he said,

33 The damsel concerning whom thou speakest, verily, her name, _it
is_ Such an One.  And he forgat that it was lately changed.

34 And the keeper of the inn waxed very wroth; yea, his rage flew all
around him.  And he spake unto the young man again, saying, Is thy
face then _of_ brass that thou speakest unto me thus?

35 ¶ And what thou hast said, that have I suspected long _enough_,
for so it is writ upon the young _thing's_ baggage.  Take heed,
therefore, and pay attention.  Because it is late, therefore shalt
thou sojourn in my house _during_ the night.

36 And the damsel, she shall sojourn here _also_.  Nevertheless there
shall be a separation of two floors between you lest, _peradventure_,
ye come together by a chance.  And to-morrow thou shalt proceed upon
thy way.

37 And it was even as the keeper _of the_ inn had said.  And when the
morning was come, they arose from their couches ere the sky was red
and they shook the dust of _that_ place from off their feet.

38 And they hied them with speed to another place.  And they said
unto the keeper of the inn that was there, We have come from a _very
distant_ city, and we have journeyed the whole night through.  And,
now, behold, we are fatigued, and _there is_ no strength left in us.

39 And because the young man, he forgat not the damsel's name
_again_, therefore were they permitted for to seek their couch.  And
they slumbered heavily during _all_ that day.




CHAPTER XVI.

1 _The scribe goeth forth_.  4 _He receiveth warning_.  6 _Concerning
a certain damsel_.  15 _The infernal regions_.  18 _A certain woman
maketh inquiry_.  21 _A guardian of the peace admonisheth him_.  26
_The anger of the people_.


Now it came to pass that I did go _forth_ into the highways of the
city for to be amongst the young things that do gambol together, the
one with the other.

2 And when I was come out, lo, it was night.  And the stars were in
the sky, and the moon also, it was there.  Verily, it was a night
_for_ love.

3 And as I went my way, behold, there was a certain man, _being_ of
the guardians of the people; and in his right hand he did carry a
silver whistle.

4 ¶ And I perceived that there was a paper about the middle of him,
even _upon_ his stomach did I see it; and writ upon the paper were
the words, TAKE COVER.

5 Wherefore I did hie me thence, and I did repair unto a certain
eating-house, craving meat _for_ to nourish my bones and a little
wine _for_ to moisten my sinews.

6 ¶ And when I was come into that place, behold, there was a damsel,
a daughter of the land of En, and comely withal.

7 And _there was_ pride in her manner of bearing, and her eyes did
look forth as a morning in spring.  Also, she was of the appearance
of twenty years.

8 And even as I gazed upon the freshness of her, lo, the head of the
eating-house, being a stranger _in the land_ of En, he approached
nigh unto her, and he did make obeisance.

9 And after he had wept _a little_, he entreated her leave for to
speak.  And she commanded him that he should speak.

10 And he spake unto her in these words, saying, Thy servant hath a
dungeon pertaining unto him; _it is_ a spacious dungeon, and roomy
withal.  Therefore, I beseech thee that we go down into the
nether-most corner of it, which is a place of safety whither danger
cometh not.

11 And after she had heard _all that_ he did say, then waxed she
wroth indeed.  And she looked upon him in a _certain_ way, and she
spake unto him angrily, saying,

12 Because thou hast dared to say _these_ things unto me, therefore
will I eat no more at thy table.

13 Verily, the king of Hu, he may scatter me unto the stars, if _so
be it_ he can; but it is not _in him_ to send me down to thy dungeon.

14 And notwithstanding that her words, they were lacking in wisdom,
nevertheless, I was filled with a great pride _because_ she was one
of the women of En.

15 ¶ And after I was come out of that place, I did get me _down_ unto
the infernal regions that are underneath the earth.

16 And the people that were there, they were in number as the hairs
upon the backs of twenty horses; and there were men of En _amongst
them_ also; yes, several of them did I see.

17 And I perceived a great profusion of chattels, and goods in an
infinite variety.  And the women that were _there_, they were eating
divers victuals for to sustain their bodies; but the children and
men, they did _take_ theirs from a bottle.

18 ¶ And a certain woman that I knew not, she spake unto me in these
words, saying, I beseech thee, son of man, to impart unto me the hour
of our going up.

19 And because the affair was not of my doing, therefore _neither_
did I know the hour of the going up.  Nevertheless, I scrupled not to
tell her the time of it, for _she was_ an old thing and full of
trepidation.

20 Now the stink in that place, it was full of violence, being very
abominable, so that _I was_ like to be sick unto death because of it.
Wherefore, I did make haste for to get me out _of it_, fearing to
tarry there any longer.

21 ¶ And after I was come up, I did go forth into the night.  And
immediately I was espied by a guardian of the people; and _he_
admonished me soundly.

22 And he showed me an hole near by that was lately dug by the men of
Hu; and he told me _also_ concerning the danger attending on fools.
And he bade me take heed of his warning.

23 But in all the time that he did speak unto me concerning my
safety, he spake nothing _concerning_ his own, so that I did marvel
greatly at his valour.

24 Nevertheless, _he was_ a little man and fat, and the bristles of
his brows stood out _as_ an army at attention.

25 And even as I yet delayed my going down, lo, one blew a bugle; and
immediately the people came out in their thousands from their places
_in the_ bowels of the earth.

26 ¶ And I did go amongst the multitude for to hear them, and what
they said _about_ it.

27 And when I had heard the things that I _did_ hear, I perceived
that they were greatly vexed in spirit; and the _manner_ of their
indignation, it was in two kinds.

28 And they said many bitter things _against_ the men of Hu, because
of the thing that they had done.

29 But they were provoked beyond measure against the rulers of En,
_because_ they did not do those things, and _more_ also, in the
cities of the land of Hu.




CHAPTER XVII.

1 _The city of Lon is divided into parts_.  4 _Certain men get them
new names_.  7 _An heavy tax is imposed upon the traders_.  11 _A
dearth of paper arises in the land_.  13 _Concerning Northcliffe_.
16 _And concerning Welz_.  22 _Strange chariots are seen throughout
the land_.  25 _The ways of the charioteers_.


All Gaul is divided into three parts; but _at the time_ when there
was war, the city of Lon, it was divided into more parts than three.
And unto each part _there was_ a number given.

2 And it was ordained that whosoever should write him an epistle unto
any man of Lon, he should write also the number of _the part_ upon
the outside of it.

3 And all the people obeyed the commandment.  But the rulers, and the
servants _of the_ rulers, they obeyed it not, being exercised with
the business of the war _so that_ they forgot all else.

4 ¶ Now there were certain men and their names, they were framed
_after_ the manner of those of Hu.  And it was a cause of continual
trouble unto them that their names, they were _what_ they were.

5 And they gathered themselves together and they did commune, the one
with the other, _concerning_ their infirmity.  And they cursed the
days of their births, and did pour loud murmurings of anger _upon_
the heads of their ancestors.

6 And, _afterwards_, they gat them new names.  Yea, whatsoever name
seemed good _unto_ them, that name did they take for themselves, so
that no man ever _again_ did hold up his hands in horror at the
mention of them.

7 ¶ Now the rulers laid a tax upon the profits of all the traders
that did make benefit during _the time_ when there was war.  And it
was an heavy tax, so that little was left over.

8 Wherefore all the traders set them out for to make that kind of
money _that is_ not amongst the profits.  And they were hard put to
_for_ to do it.

9 And they became full of generosity towards their servants, and they
did exercise great care in the preservation of their buildings, nor
grudged a little money for to make them beautiful.

10 Yea, they were full of craft, and their cunning filled the hearts
of the righteous _sort_ with envy.  And the money that they did make,
verily, it was not all of the kind _that is_ amongst the profits.

11 ¶ Now it came to pass that a great dearth of paper arose
throughout the land, and all the people were afraid _because_ of it,
And they reasoned amongst themselves, the one with the other,
_saying_,

12 By what means shall the scribes instruct us if, so _be_ it, the
paper be taken away?  And who shall train us _up_ in the way we
should go?

13 ¶ And there was a _certain_ man, and his name, it was Northcliffe.
And he called all the people unto him, and he spake unto them.

14 And he went down on his knees _before_ them, and he besought them
earnestly and _with_ many tears that they should refrain from buying
that paper which did bear the _sign_ of The Times.

15 And the power of his eloquence, it did move them mightily.  Also,
his paper was _of the_ cost of two pennies at a time when two
farthings sufficed for another.  Wherefore many did hearken unto his
prayer.

16 ¶ Now there was a learned scribe, and his name, _it was_ Welz.
And he was the first amongst all the men of En that did fly unto the
moon.

17 And it came to pass that he did set out for to get him paper, and
_he did_ get it.  Yea, notwithstanding that it was _a time_ of war,
nevertheless, he did get him a great abundance of paper.

18 And after it was got together, he sate him _down_ upon a seat, and
he did write.  And after the writing was finished, he called certain
men unto him, and he did flip his fingers, _and_ he said unto them,

19 Behold, there is a new God come to be over us.  For I _that_ know,
I have written it.  And what I have writ, verily, _it is_.  And _it
was_ not.

20 And he did get him more paper, and he sate him _down_ again, and
he did write.  And after the writing was finished, he called certain
men unto him, and he did flip his fingers, _and_ he said unto them,

21 Behold, there is no king for to reign over us.  For I _that_ know,
I have written it.  And what I have writ, verily, _it is_.  And _it
was_ not.

22 ¶ Now it came to pass about this time that many strange chariots
were seen throughout the land.  And each one did carry _upon it_ a
mighty bag, a puffed out _thing_ of wonderful design.

23 And they were those chariots that erstwhile had been wont to take
their motion _from_ a tank but, being converted, they now did take it
_from_ the bag.

24 Nevertheless, it was whispered amongst the people that
notwithstanding that the bag, it was full, yet _would_ they move not
when the tank was empty.  Wherefore many _did_ doubt the sincerity of
their conversion.

25 ¶ Now whensoever it happened that a young man approached unto the
driver of a public chariot seeking for to hire him _at a price_, then
would the charioteer consider him for to see _the manner_ of man that
he was.

26 And he would look upon the countenance of the young man; yea, from
the crown of his head unto the soles that were upon his feet, _he
would_ observe him narrowly.

27 And if the young man pleased him, he would say unto him, Because
thou hast found favour _in_ mine eyes, therefore am I content.  And
the hire, it shall be _at a price_.

28 But if the young man was ill-favoured nor found favour in the eyes
of the charioteer _because_ he carried a mean look, then would the
charioteer say unto him,

29 Begone, thou _man_ of little promise, for what have I _to do_ with
thee?  Also, the wheels of my chariot are lacking in wind, _and_ I am
a man that hath an empty tank.

30 Yea, howsoever it was, verily, he would have his _reason_.  And
after he had finished speaking, then would he haste him away _for_ to
seek the man of his choice.




CHAPTER XVIII.

1 _Food is measured out unto the people_.  4 _A certain woman hath an
appetite_.  12 _She retaineth it_.  13 _The ways of a young man_.  15
_The rulers lay hands on the people's pleasures_.  23 _Concerning
certain amongst the makers of munitions for the war_.


Now the chief larderer of the land of En did send unto the people,
and he spake unto them concerning _the things_ that they should eat,
and concerning _how_ much.

2 And he commanded them that they should partake of meat according to
a _certain_ measure, and of other things also, a weekly rate _for_
every week, all the weeks of the war.

3 And he cautioned all them that were given _over_ to the pursuit of
food, and he forbade them to eat of certain viands save only
according to the measure.  And he gave all the people cards; yea,
unto every man, _he did_ give a card.

4 ¶ Now there was a certain woman, _being_ a woman of an appetite,
and she lived in an house where four people were.  And she went unto
the bazaar, and she did buy _her_ meat.

5 And she did pay for it in five pieces of silver _and_ in four new
stamps.  And the meat, it was to provide sustenance during all _that_
week for them that were in the house.

6 And when she was come home, she did put it in a safe _place_,
saying, Because it is a little meat, _therefore_ let us preserve it
until the Sabbath be come.

7 Now it came to pass that two of them that did live in that house,
_they were_ called away; and the Sabbath was not yet come.

8 And the woman, she was left alone with her husband; and the meat,
it did _also_ remain.  And she lifted up her voice on high, singing
songs of jubilation _because_ the meat, it was grown double.

9 And she said unto her husband, Let us therefore make us a festival,
and let us eat our fill, _and_ more also.  And let us buy wine _of a_
rare vintage for to cheer us on the day.

10 And she went out and she did get her wine _of a_ rare vintage that
was very old.  And her Sabbath eve was passed in joyful expectation.

11 And _when_ the morrow was come, she made her preparations for the
festival.  And she made her sauces of a choice flavour, and a
_little_ gravy also.  And when the mixing of them, it was done, she
betook herself unto the safe _place_ where the meat, it was hid.

12 ¶ And, behold, it was gone, being eaten _up_ of the cat.  And the
anguish of that woman, _it was_ terrible.  Neither did the sauces of
a choice flavour, nor the gravy, nor the wine of a rare vintage
suffice for to console her in _the time_ of her tribulation.

13 ¶ Now whensoever it happened that a young man, being devoured of
love for a damsel, did seek for to pave _the way_, then would he wait
upon the damsel's mother.

14 And he would bring with him seven small pieces of sugar and a
little butter, for _it was_ a sure means, nor ever failed of _its_
purpose.

15 ¶ Now the rulers made them a decree, and they ordained that a
measure of water, it should be added unto all the strong drink that
_was_ sold throughout the land.

16 And the publicans made haste with a good heart for to fulfil the
rulers' behest; yea, wonderful _was_ their zeal in the doing of it.

17 Wherefore that which was erstwhile strong, behold, _it was_ grown
very weak; nevertheless, there were some who contended that a little
_of it_, sprinkled upon ground where seeds were, it hastened _the
time_ of the harvest.

18 And the rulers of the land did also make them a new ale, _being_
of the colour of drink, but not otherwise.

19 And all the blowers of froth, they came _together_ for to seek
enlivenment of it.  Nevertheless, after that they had drunk all that
which the publicans did _have_, yet gat they not enlivenment.

20 But they remained a miserable _lot_ and sober; verily, there was
not one amongst them that could say unto his friend on the morrow,

21 Assuredly, _it was_ a goodly night and very pleasing, _for_ I did
get me rarely oiled, being bailed out _by_ my brother.

22 Wherefore many did murmur against the rulers _because_ they
stretched forth their hands for to touch the pleasures of the people.

23 ¶ Now it came to pass on occasions that _certain_ of the makers of
munitions for the war, being the foolish and the ill-advised amongst
them, they did cease from their labours because they were displeased.

24 Peradventure they were dissatisfied on account of their hire,
seeking that _it should_ be added to by the matter of one farthing
_for_ every hour of their labour.

25 And after they had rested them for a time, withholding their help
from their brothers that _were_ gone into battle, then that which
they asked, it would be given unto them.

26 And they would take it as the fitting reward of _their_
persistence, nor recked the farthing, that it was paid for in the
blood of valiant men.

27 Nevertheless, there _were_ also others amongst the makers of
munitions that ceased not from their labours, nor rested them either
by day or by night, but _were_ for ever at it.

28 And all the people honoured them, being thankful that such _as
these_, both the men and the women _of them_, they were left for to
prove the land of En _before_ the eyes of the world.




CHAPTER XIX.

1 _Concerning the women_.  3 _Certain of them are rewarded_.  4 _And
certain of them go forth with the fighters_.  7 _And certain of them
become scribes unto the rulers_.  16 _Concerning revelations_.  19
_The young man and the maiden that was full up_.


Now the things that came to pass amongst the women of the land, they
were of divers kinds _according_ to the manner of the women.

2 And _those_ that before the war had been wont to ride through the
country carrying fire and brimstone, they became _full of_ zeal for
the glory of En.

3 ¶ Wherefore they gat their reward, being vouchsafed the right to
speak on the choice of the rulers.  And they were filled with
contentment, _saying_, the one unto the other, It is _the_ beginning.

4 ¶ And certain of the women did go forth for _to be_ with the
fighters of En.  And they were of two kinds.  And some of them _were_
Waacs, and some of them _were_ Wrens.

5 And those that were Waacs, they were _of the_ land; and those that
were Wrens, they were _of the_ sea.

6 And the things that _they did_ do made all men wonder, for they
avoided not the hardships of their brothers, but shared with them the
trials _on_ the way.

7 ¶ And certain of the damsels did contrive for to get them work _at
the hands_ of the governors; and they did go unto those places where
the business of war, _it was_ carried on.

8 And after the work of the day, it was come to an end, then would
they foregather, and they would commune, the one with the other.  And
they would say,

9 Hast thou seen the new captain that be come _unto_ our room?
Verily, he hath a countenance that pleaseth me mightily, and his
eyes, they be blue; moreover, _there is_ hair upon his lip that
tempteth exceedingly.

10 Also, he hath looked upon me _with a_ look; and, peradventure, I
have found favour in his eyes.  Yea, notwithstanding that men _do
say_ he hath got shekels in abundance, nevertheless, I have a feeling
towards him _in spite_ of it.

11 And the damsel unto whom she did speak, she would make answer, and
she would say, Verily, there are _many_ that will envy thee because
of thy captain.  And now will I tell thee _something_ also.

12 There is a certain man and _he is_ of an high rank, being even
_one_ that captains do salute.  And he is _that man_ who doth say
unto me the things that _I shall_ write.

13 And _after that_ I have brought the writing unto him and he hath
made his mark _upon it_, then doth he reward me; and the manner of
the reward, _it is_ a kiss.

14 Peradventure in a _little_ time he will make him an arrangement
for to meet me afterwards, _the better_ to say unto me all those
things that a man, who loveth much, doth speak to the maiden that
_hath_ him.

15 And, _because_ thou art my friend, _therefore_ shalt thou be
welcome to mine house when _the time_ cometh that we be wed.

16 ¶ And certain of the damsels did don strange apparel, that was
_like_ unto the raiment of men.  And their nether limbs did stand
revealed; yea, their legs, _they were_ no longer hid.

17 And men perceived their shape, that some _of them_ were straight,
and some were _of a_ curve; and the others, they knocked them _at_
the knees.

18 And they cursed the war in their hearts because of these things,
that _it had_ revealed them.  And they prayed that _the days_ of
their innocence might be given back unto them and their faith again
_made_ whole.

19 ¶ Now _there were_ some amongst the young men that, being with a
maid, did wrongly read the tokens of the damsel's love, _and_ the
look of it, thinking, Perchance the damsel fasteth over long.

20 And _he_ would say unto her, Let us now seek out _a place_ where
we may regale ourselves with meat, _and_ with choice viands.

21 And with a measure of prepared wheat, _and_ with a little wine
also, for _I perceive_ that thy stomach, it troubleth thee _somewhat_.

22 And the damsel, she would make denial _of it_, and she would be
loth _for_ to go in, feigning to be freshly nourished, and abundantly.

23 And he would strive to cajole her; nevertheless, for a long time,
she _would_ hearken not unto the voice of his pleadings.

24 But when he was come to the end of his persuasions and she did
perceive that the meal, _it was_ in peril, then would she speak unto
him _earnestly_.

25 And she would say unto him, For thy sake will I do _this thing_;
yea, for none other would I eat at _a time_ when I be full up.  And
after that she was finished speaking, then _would_ she go in.

26 And if she did know that the taste of his mouth was _towards_
sweetness, then would she seek to gain favour in his eyes, and she
would say unto him,

27 Take thou _the morsel_ of sugar that be mine, for the need of thy
servant, it is nought in comparison with thine.

28 And so she would win his regard, even with _the morsel_ of sugar
would she do it.  And, _afterwards_, she would set about it, and she
would _eat_.

29 And when she had made an end _of eating_, the young man, he would
be amazed.  And upon the next day, he would say unto his friend,

30 Verily, it were better to take an hungry man into _such a place_
than a maiden, full up, _that_ holdeth back.

31 Yea, what shall it profit a man that the music _tell_ of a perfect
day, if his pockets be empty and the week, _it yet_ young.




CHAPTER XX.

Take heed, my son, and hearken unto the words of Artemas, for there
_are_ many that will give thee counsel, yet wisdom _cometh_ only from
the few.

2 Depart not from the narrow _path_ of virtue, for he that steppeth
_from_ the duck board, assuredly, he getteth him wet feet.

3 Therefore, make thy life wisely, O my son, lest thy neighbour speak
ill _concerning_ thee.

4 For the way of the transgressor, _it is_ soft, needing a light
tread _and_ without weight.  And he that leaveth his footprint
behind, his foolishness doth condemn him.

5 But whosoever sinneth with prudence, _that man_ shall be exalted
unto heaven, and his name, it shall exhale a perfume very sweet.

6 A damsel blusheth _because_ of thee; verily, she is sick _of_ love.
If there be an asp in the house, embrace it; it were better this
_than_ that.

7 For the thongs with _which_ thou thinkest to have bound her, fool!
_they are_ knotted about thyself.

8 The wages of sin is death, but a wife may be given _even_ unto the
righteous.

9 Beware of thy wife _when_ she forgiveth thee.  When she sayeth unto
thee, What _matter_ the wildness of thy young oats, then shalt thou
_take_ care.

10 Verily, she schemeth only that she _may_ draw thee on.  And
_whatsoever_ thou shalt say, that will she surely have _up_ against
thee.

11 Neither will she _cease_ from reminding thee concerning all thy
wickedness, digging up thine ill-sown _fields_ continually.

12 For in this manner will she show thee how deep are the _depths_ of
thy vileness.  And the forgiveness of so _much_, shall it not signify
the largeness of her heart?

13 Now _there_ is a way unto the management of a wife, and a manner
of bringing her up.

14 For the wise man, he speaketh _with_ his mouth, and he saith unto
her, Thou art fair, _my_ love, _my_ spouse; thou art fair.

15 Thou hast ravished my heart _with_ one of thine eyes; with the
other also hast thou taken me, and I am _become_ exceedingly thine.

16 And after he has said all these things unto her, and more also,
then doth he send her out _for to_ gather him victuals.  And, behold,
she goeth forth content.

17 But the fool, he worketh the raw skin unto his bones for love of
her, neither seeketh he requital because of it.  And, lo, _the woman_
complaineth for ever.

18 Remember thy life, _that_ thou livest it, for it was given unto
thee _for_ the purpose;

19 And he that counselleth thee in otherwise, _he is_ a fool that
doth threaten to rob thee of thy mite.

20 By a damsel's kisses shalt thou know her; and the kiss of thy best
beloved, _it shall_ be fraught with disappointment.

21 For if she hath not met the lips of other men, then _shall_ her
kisses lack seasoning.

22 But if she knoweth _the way_, assuredly, some other hath been _at
her_.

23 The damsel crieth out in her foolishness, _saying_, A little love,
and a little love, and a little love.  And the young man fleeth
_before_ her.

24 But the wise virgin _maketh_ a discreet noise; and she taketh him
unawares.




CHAPTER XXI.

Blessed is he _that_ hath a full drum; and those that wait without
the bazaars, they shall look _upon it_ with envy.

2 A little love warmeth the blood; but much _love_, it is a consuming
fire.

3 Wherefore, beware of the damsel with ruddy locks.  For if _it be_
so, assuredly she will devour thee up; but if it be _of_ henna, a
draught of spring water will serve thee equally.

4 Beware of all women, and avoid thou them that _would_ undo thee.

5 For the ways of those do grow in artfulness; neither is there any
_man_ that can stand up against them.

6 Now there is a certain woman, and she hath hair _of a_ length; it
is like unto silk also, and the colour of it allureth the eye.

7 Verily, _that_ woman will contrive that thou shall loosen the pin
_of it_.  Yea, in thy clumsiness, thou shalt _bring it_ down.

8 For _it is_ a snare with which she seeketh to entrap thee; and the
cunning of her maketh thee her tool in _the matter of_ thine own
enticement.

9 List not to the voice of the tale-bearer, and the scandalmonger
shalt thou abhor _with_ a great abhorrence.

10 For what hast thou _to do_ with virtue?  And who art thou to
prescribe thy neighbour's life?

11 Verily, rumour raceth like the wind; it groweth quicker than light
_when_ the sun riseth.  And scandal, it is the father of more
children _than_ are.

12 Judge not a man according to the look of him, else shalt thou be
many times deceived.

13 For the brightest button, is it the chief upon thy raiment?  Nay,
neither _doth_ it support thy necessary garment.

14 The young man, he loveth easily, _but_ at two score years he
waxeth discreet.

15 The damsel, she loveth easily, _and_ at two score years she waxeth
easier.

16 In the heat of the desert, then think of Hell, for _it is_ a
pleasant thought that will comfort thee somewhat.

17 Thine enemy hurleth a missile.  It cometh through the air for to
_out_ thee.  If thou art a fool, remove not from that place.  But if
thou art wise, then haste thee quickly away.

18 For every snail _hath_ its shell, and he getteth it on his back;
but the laggard, he getteth _it_ in the neck.

19 Howbeit, it is not always the quick _man_ that goeth first over
the top.

20 A damsel inclineth towards thee.  She regardeth thee with soft
eyes and _there is_ meaning in her glance.

21 Peradventure thou hast a blot upon the beauty of thy face _which_
annoyeth thee continually.  Nevertheless, she will not see it.

22 At the largeness of thine ears, at the uprightness of thine hair,
at thy teeth that _were_ made for thee, she will look at none of
these.

23 But if thy pocket be empty, lo, she will see _them_ all.  Neither
will she forgive thee for being _what_ thou art.

24 Woe unto man that be born upon earth, neither is there any help
_in him_ save only death.

25 For whosoever liveth his years in solitude, his old age _shall be_
full of desolation.  But whosoever taketh unto himself a wife, that
man's last days, they shall be an abomination unto him.

26 Take heed, my son, and hearken unto the words of Artemas, for
there _are_ many that will give thee counsel, yet wisdom _cometh_
only from the few.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARTEMAS--THE SECOND BOOK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
